Crime
- nero - uf dis atari - 3 sae ; afeeyeeinae as : a poeescanees =<
"!""? he bent over her once"
"""""Ah, he's eating, then he's not ill,"" said Razumihin. He took a chair and sat down at the table opposite Raskolnikov."
"""..» But I should like to know why mother has written to me about ‘our most rising generation'? Simply as a descriptive touch, or with the idea of prepossessing me in favour of Mr. Luzhin? Oh, the cunning of them! I should like to know one thing more: how far they were open with one another that day and night and all this time since? Was"
"""A thing ... cigarette case. ... Silver. . . . Look at it."""
"""A-ah,"" he signed towards her uneasily. He wanted to say something."
"""Ach, hang it!"" Raskolnikov whispered with loathing and contempt, as though he did not want to speak aloud. /"
"""All that is not in the article, there's only a hint of it,"" said Raskolnikov."
"""All that's nonsense,"" he said hopefully, ""and there is noth- ing in it all to worry about! It's simply physical derange- ment. Just a glass of beer, a piece of dry bread-and in"
"""All this is very naive . . . excuse me, I should have said impudent on your part,"" said Raskolnikov."
"""All?"" he asked with a malignant grin."
"""Anatomy ?"""
"""And have you made much money by your thinking?"" she managed to articulate at last. -."
"""And here ... I am again on the same errand,"" Raskolni- kov continued, a little disconcerted and surprised at the old woman's mistrust. ""Perhaps she is always like that though, only I did not notice it the other time,"" he thought with an uneasy feeling."
"""And Svidrigailov was a riddle . . . He worried him, that was true, but somehow not on the same point. He might still have a struggle to come with Svidrigailov. Svidrigailov, -too, might be a means of escape; but Porfiry was a different matter."
"""And what does God do for you?"" he asked, probing her further."
"""And what if I run away?"" asked Raskolnikov with a strange smile."
"""And what if there are only spiders there, or something of that sort,"" he said suddenly."
"""And will get to know each other through and through?"" added Raskolnikov."
"""And you dared to call me as witness?"" he said, going up to Pyotr Petrovitch."
"""And your little surprise, aren't you going to show it to me?"" Raskolnikov said, sarcastically."
"""Are you such a good dissembler?"" Raskolnikov asked carelessly."
"""Aren't you ashamed now, sister?"" asked Raskolnikov."
"""At last he sees through him!"" thought Raskolnikov."
"""But has Katernia Ivanovna been able to manage with such small means? Does she even mean to have a funeral lunch?"" . Raskolnikov asked, persistently keeping up the conversation."
"""But is it possible?"" he brought out faintly. Raskolnikov looked wrathfully at him. /"
"""But perhaps they won't fit,"" observed Nastasya. r"
"""But perhaps you are telling lies?' Raskolnikov put in."
"""But they all write like that, you know,' Razumihin observed, abruptly. ""Have you read it?"" /"
"""But what a braggart you are,"" Raskolnikov said with some disgust."
"""But what are you driving at now?"" Raskolnikov mut- tered at last, asking the question without thinking. ."
"""but what help can he be to me now? Suppose he gets me"
"""But why do you worry about it?"" Raskolnikov inter- posed suddenly. ""It's in accordance with your theory!"""
"""But you can't write, you can hardly hold the pen,"" observed the head clerk, looking with curiosity at Raskolnikov. ""Are you ill?"""
"""But, perhaps, there is no God at all,' Raskolnikov answered with a sort of malignance, laughed and looked at her."
"""By evil thoughts."""
"""Can it be you can imagine nothing juster and more comforting than that?"" Raskolnikov cried, with a feeling of anguish."
"""Come along,"" Zossimov repeated insistently, and he went out. Razumihin thought a minute and ran to over- take him."
"""Come now... you are harsh,"" muttered Nikodim"
"""Did you see him?"" asked Raskolnikov after a pause."
"""Dmitri Prokofitch."""
"""Do tell me, please, what you or he'-Zossimov nodded at Raskolnikov--""can have in common with this Zametov?"""
"""Do you go to the right, Sofya Semyonovna? How did you find me, by the way?"" he added, as though he wanted to say something quite different. He wanted to look at her soft clear eyes, but this was not easy. :"
"""Do you know that I am being followed?"" asked Raskolnikov, looking inquisitively at him."
"""Do you understand now?"" said Raskolnikov, his face twitching nervously. ""Go back, go to them,"" he said sud- denly, and turning quickly, he went out of the house."
"""Don't be too sure,"" he answered, twisting his mouth into a smile,"
"""Don't believe it, then!"" answered Raskolnikov, with a cold, careless smile. ""You were noticing nothing as usual, but I was weighing every word."""
"""Dounia, good-bye,"" called Raskolnikov, in the passage. ""Give me your hand."""
"""Dounia,"" Raskolnikov continued with an effort, ""I don't want that marriage, so at the first opportunity to-morrow you must refuse Luzhin, so that we may never hear his name again,"""
"""Enough, mother,"" said Raskolnikov, deeply regretting that he had come. ri"
"""Every one has his plans,"" Raskolnikov answered gloomily and impatiently."
"""Examining them?"" Raskolnikov asked aloud."
"""Excited? Not a bit of it,' said Razumihin, stung to the quick."
"""Excuse me...I thought I should find you,"" he said, addressing Raskolnikov suddenly, ""that is, I didn't mean anything... of that sort... but I just thought."
"""Fool,"" Raskolnikov swore to himself."
"""From her queerness. No, I'll tell you what. I could kill that damned old woman and make off with her money, I as- sure you, without the faintest conscience-prick,""' the student added with warmth. The officer laughed again while Ras- kolnikov shuddered. How strange it was!"
"""From his voice he must be quite young,' thought Ras- kolnikov."
"""From Porfiry."""
"""Give it me,"" said Raskolnikov."
"""Give me something to drink . .. Nastasya."""
"""Go in alone!"" said Raskolnikov suddenly. ""I will be back directly."""
"""Guess,"" he said, with the same distorted helpless smile."
"""Hand it over,' he said roughly."
"""Have you guessed?"" he whispered at last."
"""He can scarcely stand upright. And you. . .""--Nikodim Fomitch was beginning."
"""He can scrawl his name. Have you got the book?'"
"""He has just been to see me,"" said Raskolnikov, breaking his silence for the first time."
"""He is a madman,"" thought Raskolnikov."
"""He really has put it well, though,"" Raskolnikov thought."
"""Here,"" said Raskolnikov feeling in his pocket and find- ing twenty copecks, ""here, call a cab and tell him to drive"
"""He's learnt it by heart to show off!"" Raskolnikov pro< nounced suddenly."
"""Hit her in the face, in the eyes, in the eyes,"" cried Mikolka. ."
"""Hm! ... that's all right,' muttered Raskolnikov. ""Do you know, I fancied ...1 keep thinking that it may have been an hallucination."""
"""H'm! But I don't know why you want to tell us such gossip, mother,"" said Raskolnikov irritably, as it were in spite of himself."
"""How aa"
"""How can you? That cannot be!"" <"
"""How do you know?"" he whispered, hardly able to breathe."
"""How so? If you are convinced you ought... ."
"""How, how can I thank you!"" Pulcheria Alexandrovna was beginning, once more pressing Razumihin's hands, but Raskolnikov interrupted her again."
"""I am doing..."" Raskolnikov began sullenly and re- luctantly."
"""I am the murderer. . . . I want to give evidence,"" Nikolay pronounced,"
"""I am thinking,"" he answered seriously after a pause."
"""I beg you to say no more,"" said Raskolnikov. ""In any case this is unpardonable impertinence."""
"""I can't help it... . 1 will come in half an hour. Tell them."""
"""I do,' repeated Raskolnikov, raising his eyes to Porfiry."
"""I don't want it,"" said Raskolnikov, pushing away the pen."
"""I fainted then because it was so close and the smell of paint,"" said Raskolnikov."
"""I know."""
"""I remember now,"" said Raskolnikov after a long, suller silence. Razumihin looked at him, frowning and uneasy."
"""I say nothing about him,"" added Raskolnikov, pointing to Razumihin, ""though he has had nothing from me either but insult and trouble."""
"""I suppose you didn't expect it?"" said Raskolnikov who, though he had not fully grasped the situation, had regained his courage."
"""I was summoned... by a notice..."" Raskolnikov faltered."
"""I won't drink anything,"" said Raskolnikov."
"""I... No, oh no,"" muttered Svidrigailov, really seeming to be deep in thought."
"""If I had done that thing, I should certainly have said that I had seen the workmen and the flat,' Raskolnikov answered, with reluctance and obvious disgust."
"""If so, what did you come for?"" Raskolnikov asked irri- tably. ""I ask you the same question again: if you consider me guilty, why don't you take me to prison?"""
"""If they question me, perhaps Vl simply tell,"" he thought, as he drew near the police-station."
"""Ilya Petrovitch is a blockhead,"" he decided."
"""Is it possible, is it possible,"" flashed through his mind, ""that he is still lying? He can't be, he can't be."" He re- jected that idea, feeling to what a degree of fury it might drive him, feeling that that fury might drive him mad."
"""Is Raskolnikov in there? Has he come?"" he asked him in a whisper."
"""IT don't know ... to-morrow. .. ."""
"""IT don't want... translation,"" muttered Raskolnikov from the stairs."
"""IT have only you now,"" he added. ""Let us go together."
"""It was base of me to say that. . . . My mother herself is almost a beggar .. . and I told a lie to keep my lodging ... and be fed,"" Raskolnikov said loudly and distinctly."
"""It was to put them off the scent... . I ran after Mitka,"" Nikolay replied hurriedly, as though he had prepared the answer."
"""It's I... . come to see you,"" answered Raskolnikov and he walked into the tiny entry."
"""I've come to you for the last time,' Raskolnikov went on gloomily, although this was the first time. ""I may per- haps not see you again . . ."""
"""I've got to think of that,' he thought. ""Excuse me, please,"" he began, affecting extreme embarrassment. ""Ras- kolnikov."""
"""Juster? And how can we tell, perhaps that is just, and do you know it's what I would certainly have made it,"" answered Svidrigailov, with a vague smile."
"""Katerina Ivanovna is in consumption, rapid consumption; she will soon die,"" said Raskolnikov after a pause, without answering her question."
"""Kindly allow me,"" Raskolnikov went on irritably, ""to ask you to explain why you have honoured me with your visit... and ...andIam in a hurry, I have no time to waste. I want to go out."""
"""Last night."""
"""Lebeziatnikov ?"" said Raskolnikov slowly, as if recalling something."
"""Let me be! I don't want to!"" Raskolnikov waved him off. He had listened with disgust to Razumihin's efforts to be playful about his purchases."
"""Let me go!"" said Raskolnikov and tried to pass him. This was too much for Razumihin; he gripped him firmly by the shoulder."
"""Let us go,"" decided Raskolnikov. ""I will come to you to-day, Sofya Semyonovna. Only tell me where you live."""
"""Life would be too easy if it were so,"" answered Raskolnikov."
"""Literally."""
"""Lizaveta,' murmured Raskolnikov hardly audibly."
"""Make haste! Make haste!"" repeated Svidrigailov, still without turning or moving. But there seemed a terrible significance in the tone of that ""make haste."""
"""May God forgive you,"" answered Raskolnikov."
"""Money? What money?"" thought Raskolnikov, ""but... then . . . it's certainly not that."""
"""Never mind,"" he said, ""I have come for this: I have no lessons. ...I1 wanted... but I don't really want les- Sons. bicT"
"""N-no ..."" whispered Sonia."
"""No doubt you think, like every one, that I was too severe with him,"" she went on, addressing Raskolnikov."
"""No ky"
"""No one in?"" Raskolnikov asked, addressing the person at the bureau."
"""No, I have not happened to,' answered Raskolnikov. ""What do you mean?"""
"""No, I know nothing about it,"" said Svidrigailov, seem- ing surprised."
"""No, I won't believe it!"" Raskolnikov cried, with positive anger."
"""No, not a commonplace! Fithdrto, for instance, if I were told ‘love thy neighbour,' what came of it?"" Pyotr Petrovitch went on, perhaps with excessive haste. ""It came to my tear- ing my coat in half to share with my neighbour and we both were left half naked. As a Russian proverb has it, ‘catch several hares and you won't catch one.' Science now tells us, love yourself before all men, for everything in the world rests on self-interest. You love yourself and manage your own affairs properly and your coat remains whole. Eco- nomic truth adds that the better private affairs are organised in society-the more whole coats, so to say-the firmer are its foundations and the better is the common welfare or- ganised too. Therefore, in acquiring wealth solely and exclusively for myself, I am acquiring so to speak, for all, and helping to bring to pass my neighbour's getting a little more than a torn coat; and that not from private, personal liberality, but as a consequence of the general advance. The idea is simple, but unhappily it has been a long time reach- ing us, being hindered by idealism and sentimentality. And yet it would seem to want very little wit to perceive Gd ok?"
"""No, not from me, but I knew he went to you and' why he went,"" Raskolnikov answered sharply."
"""No, that's not so,"" put in Zossimov. ,"
"""No,"""
"""No,"" mumbled Raskolnikov, looking away, but feeling that it was better to keep up the conversation."
"""No.""'"
"""Nonsense! Don't you believe it! But you don't believe it anyway,"" Raskolnikov let slip in his anger. But Porfiry Petrovitch did not seem to catch those strange words."
"""Not a word! Not a movement!"" cried Raskolnikov, hold- ing Razumihin back; then going close up to Luzhin, ""kindly leave the room!"" he said quietly and distinctly, ""and not a word more or... ."""
"""Nothing of the sort,' Raskolnikov insisted irritably."
"""Nothing, brother, good morning,"" answered Svidrigailov."
"""Nothing,"" Raskolnikov answered faintly, turning to the wall. All were silent for a while."
"""Nothing,"" said Zametov, getting angry, ""it's all non- sense !"""
"""Of course not. Have you tried?' he added almost ironically,"
"""Of course, Raskolnikov. You didn't imagine Id for- gotten? Don't think I am like that ... Rodion Ro--Ro Redionovitch, that's it, isn't it?"""
"""Oh! nothing-don't be uneasy. It was when I was wander- ing about yesterday, rather delirious, I chanced upon a man who had been run over ...aclerk. f"
"""Oh, but it was a long time ago! I read about it a month ago,"" Raskolnikov answered calmly. ""So you consider them criminals?"" he added smiling."
"""Oh, don't trouble, please,"" cried Raskolnikov and he sud- denly broke into a laugh. ""Please don't trouble."""
"""Oh, if the Divine Providence is to be mixed up in it, there is no doing anything,' Raskolnikov grumbled morosely."
"""On an ordinaty sheet of paper?"" Raskolnikov inter- rupted eagerly, again interested in the financial side of the question. ;"
"""On the sofa! Put him straight on the sofa, with his head this way,"" Raskolnikov showed him."
"""Perhaps it's a good thing really that he should think me almost a madman,"" thought Raskolnikov."
"""Pour it out. Stay, Pl pour it out myself. Sit down."""
"""Presently, afterwards,"" said Raskolnikov, waving it off pettishly."
"""Quite possibly,"" Raskolnikov answered contemptuously."
"""Raskolnikov? Yes. Why? Yes, he is there. I saw him just come in... Why?"""
"""Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov, a student, or formerly a student?"""
"""Shan't we?"" he added again."
"""She got a letter?"" Raskolnikov asked thoughtfully."
"""Since yesterday,"" muttered Raskolnikov in reply."
"""What! he saw you last night?"" Raskolnikov asked, as though startled. ""Then you have not slept either after your journey."""
"""What... what did he say?' Raskolnikov asked in dismay."
"""What: ???"
"""What?"""
"""What?"""
"""What?"" Raskolnikov seemed to wake up. ""Oh...I got spattered with blood helping to carry him to his lodging. By the way, mamma, I did an unpardonable thing yesterday. I was literally out of my mind. I gave away all the money you sent me ... to his wife for the funeral. She's a widow now, in consumption, a poor creature ... three little chil-"
"""What's his name?"""
"""When was it?"" Raskolnikov stopped still to recollect. ""Two or three days before her death it must have been. But I am not going to redeem the things now,"" he put in with a sort of hurried and conspicuous solicitude about the things. ""T've not more than a silver rouble left . . . after last night's accursed delirium!'"
"""Where are you off to?"""
"""Where did you get that?"" he called to her across the room."
"""Where?"" asked Raskolnikov weakly."
"""Which is your room? This way?"" and Raskolnikov trying not to look at her, hastened in."
"""Who came?"" Raskolnikov interrupted, instantly beginning to recollect."
"""Why ?"""
"""Why ?""?"
"""Why do you go?"" put in Raskolnikov."
"""Why don't you put the sugar in your tea, Nastasya Nikiforovna?""'"
"""Why in such haste?"" asked Svidrigailov, looking at him curiously. :"
"""Why, Alyona Ivanovna, you know me... Raskolnikov >. here, I brought you the pledge I promised the other day. ... and he held out the pledge."
"""Why, are you all afraid of me?"" he asked, with a con- strained smile."
"""Why, ordinary ghosts."""
"""Why, you are seriously ill, do you know that?"" He began feeling his pulse. Raskolnikov pulled away his hand."
"""Wonk oc"""
"""Write!"" said the head clerk to Raskolnikov."
"""Yes ... Tm covered with blood,"" Raskolnikov said with a peculiar air; then he smiled, nodded and went downstairs."
"""Yes, a capital thing,"" answered Raskolnikov, looking at him almost ironically."
"""Yes, and he did well. Now I understand what it all means and so does Zametov. ... Well, the fact is, Rodya..."
"""Yes, I must go,"" muttered Raskolnikov. ""Excuse"" my troubling you... ."""
"""Yes, I remember .... Vahrushin,' Raskolnikov said dreamily."
"""Yes, Iam Raskolnikov! What do you want?"""
"""Yes, rooms..."
"""Yes, yes, secondly?"" Raskolnikov was listening breath- less."
"""Yes,"" answered Raskolnikov, with an unpleasant sensa- tion at the very moment he spoke that he need not have said it."
"""Yes... no,"" Raskolnikov answered."
"""Yes; know each other through and through,"" assented Porfiry Petrovitch, and he screwed up his eyes, looking earnestly at Raskolnikov. ""Now you're going to a birthday party ?"""
"""You did really see him? You saw him clearly?"" Raskol- nikov insisted."
"""You funk the police station then?"" said Raskolnikov jeeringly."
"""You had better tell me straight out... without examples,"" she begged, still more timidly and scarcely audibly."
"""You have got rid of Marfa Petrovna, too, so they say?"" Raskolnikov interrupted rudely."
"""You must go to bed at once,"" he pronounced, examining the patient as far as he could, ""and take something for the night. Will you take it? I got it ready some time ago ""vs powder,"""
"""You need not at all. Stay. Zossimov has gone, so you must. Don't go. What's the time? Is it twelve o'clock? What a pretty watch you have got Dounia. But why are you"
"""You never said so!"" Raskolnikov cried sharply and with heat."
"""You reckon wrongly,"" interrupted Raskolnikov."
"""You should go to a doctor."" y"
"""You want to cross-examine me officially in due form?"" Raskolnikov asked sharply."
"""You want to know? Come to the police station, I'll tel:"
"""You were inquiring for me ... of the porter?"" Raskol- nikov said at last, but in a curiously quiet voice."
"""Zametov? The head clerk? What for?"" Raskolnikov turned round quickly and fixed his eyes on Razumihin."
(): an exceptionally hot evening early in July a young
"* F course, I've been meaning lately to go to Razumihin's to ask for work, to ask him to get me lessons or something...' Raskolnikov thought,"
"*Ves,"""
". ""What's the matter?"" she repeated, drawing a little away from him."
". what was there in that to be proud of? Every one ought to be a gentleman and more than that ... and all the same (he remembered) he, too, had done little things... not exactly dishonest, and yet... . And what thoughts he sometimes had; hm... and to set all that beside Avdotya Romanovna! Confound it! So be it! Well, he'd make a"
"... Katerina Ivanovna has gone out of her mind."" he blurted out suddenly, turning from Raskolnikov to Sonia."
": ""The question wasn't put quite like that,"" observed Por- ry."
"_ ""Fever,"" he answered abruptly. ""You can't help getting pale . . . if you've nothing to eat,"" he added, with difficulty articulating the words."
"_ Or this be still a dream?"" Raskolnikov thought once more. He looked carefully and suspiciously at the, unexpected visitor. ."
"= ~ : f ate ‘Soran a, S io j Pacman ecerene ; fee _ = ‘i > > : ut ‘ eee Rarey ined emer orem ren pete he Eietntetecp toshiba panied oie tertastarat 2 : Pig ISS SEES satan eee orn pentane se cesta' asa Seco eeeoeavinc ieee ' Pic ealuntagitiet neha $ - : | : Lenee pepet eter Ren . ater. ‘ 2 = | ? "" ase Cha sph ar! are ae, . Wt ark. it} peer remnstnens Speers pores peepee ne a AST ee reece"
a Se ne
A STRANGE period began for Raskolnikov: it was as
"»- + 1 tell you, he's mad on mental diseases. But don't you mind him..."" )"
§43
"about a dead man and a girl, but I didn't understand a word. ... But last night I myself..."""
"After saying this, Svidrigailov broke into a sudden laugh again. Raskolnikov saw clearly that this was a man with a firm purpose in his mind and able to keep it to himself."
"afterwards. ... One feels ashamed and goes back to a man! So remember, Potchinkov's house on the third 5 Ce Oe"
Again she did not answer. He waited.
"Again the same rubbish, the same eggshells lying about on the spiral stairs, again the open doors of the flats, again the same kitchens and the same fumes and stench coming from them. Raskolnikov had not been here since that day. His legs were numb and gave way under him, but still they moved forward. He stopped for a moment to take breath, to collect himself, so as to enter like a man. ""But why? what for?"" he wondered, reflecting. ""If I must drink the cup what difference does it make? The more revolting the better."" He imagined for an instant the figure of the ""explosive lieu- tenant,"" Ilya Petrovitch. Was he actually going to him? Couldn't he go to some one else? To Nikodim Fomitch? Couldn't he turn back and go straight to Nikodim Fomitch's lodgings? At least then it would be done privately. ... No, no! To the ""explosive lieutenant!' If he must drink it; drink it off at once."
"Ake: same day, about seven o'clock in the evening,"
And he darted down into the saloon below. Raskolnikov moved on.
And he motioned her out.
And he moved to go out.
And he thought of Sonia.
And he took another drink of vodka.
"And so on, and so on,"
"And was it worth while, after all that had happened, te contend with these new trivial difficulties? Was it worth while for instance to manceuvre that Svidrigailov should not go to Porfiry's? Was it worth while to investigate, to ascertain the facts, to waste time over any one like Svidrigailov ?"
At one time Raskolnikov thought of getting up and walking out and so finishing the interview. But some curiosity and even a sort of prudence made him linger for a moment.
At that moment something seemed to sting Raskolnikov; in an instant a complete revulsion of feeling came over him.
bed beside Katerina Ivanovna? It lay there by the pillow; Raskolnikov saw it.
Bee?
Both were going down.
"Both were silent. Razumihin was more than ecstatic and Raskolnikov perceived it with repulsion. He was alarmed, too, by what Razumihin had just, said about Porfiry."
But he wanted to say something quite different.
"But how imminent? His position gradually became clear to him. Remembering, sketchily, the main outlines of his recent scene with Porfiry, he could not help shuddering again with horror. Of course, he did not yet know all Porfiry's aims, he could not see into all his calculations. But he had already partly shown his hand, and no one knew better than Raskolnikov how terribe Porfiry's ""lead"" had been for him. A little more and he might have given himself away com- . pletely, circumstantially. Knowing his nervous temperament and from the first glance seeing through him, Porfiry, though playing a bold game, was bound to win. There's no denying that Raskolnikov had compromised himself seriously, but no facts had come to light as yet; there was nothing positive. But was he taking a true view of the position? Wasn't he mistaken? What had Porfiry been trying to get at? Had he really some surprise prepared for him? And what was it? Had he really been expecting something or not? How"
"But no sooner had he put it on than he pulled it off again in loathing and horror. He pulled it off, but reflecting that he had no other socks, he picked it up and put it on again- and again he laughed,"
But this stirred Raskolnikov's spleen more than ever and he could not resist an ironical and rather incautious challenge.
"clear as daylight. It's clear that Rodion Romanovitch Ras- kolnikov is the central figure in the business, and no one else. Oh yes, she can ensure his happiness, keep him in the university, make him a partner in the office, make his whole future secure; perhaps he may even be a rich man later on, prosperous, respected, and may even end his life a famous man! But my mother? It's all Rodya, pre- cious Rodya, her firstborn! For such a son who would not sacrifice such a daughter! Oh, loving, over-partial hearts! Why, for his sake we would not shrink even from Sonia's fate. Sonia, Sonia Marmeladov, the eternal victim so long as the world lasts. Have you taken the measure of your sacrifice, both of you? Is it right? Can you bear it? Is it any use? Is there sense in it? And let me tell you, Dounia, Sonia's life is no worse than life with Mr. Luzhin. ‘There can be no question of love' mother writes. And what if there can be no respect either, if on the contrary there is aversion, contempt, repulsion, what then? So you will have to ‘keep up your appearance,' too. Is not that so? Do you understand what that smartness means? Do you understand that the Luzhin smartness is just the same thing as Sonia's and may be worse, viler, baser, because in your case, Dounia, it's a bargain for luxuries, after all, but with Sonia it's simply a question of starvation. It has to be paid for, it has to be paid for, Dounia, this smartness. And what if it's more than you can bear afterwards, if you re- gret it? The bitterness, the misery, the curses, the tears hidden from all the world, for you are not a Marfa Pe- trovna. And how will your mother feel then? Even now she is uneasy, she is worried, but then, when she sees it all clearly? And I? Yes, indeed, what have you taken me for? I won't have your sacrifice, Dounia, I won't have it, mother! It shall not be, so long as I am alive, it shail not, it shall not! I won't accept it!"""
Du hast Diamanten und Perlen What next? That's the thing to sing.
"Du hast die schénsten Augen Madchen, was willst du mehr?"
"evident."" 197"
"F ATER on, Raskolnikov happened to find out why the huckster and his wife had invited Lizaveta. It was a very ordinary matter and there was nothing excep-"
For a moment Raskolnikov felt everything going round.
"for me to go to Razumihin. .. ."""
"front. It looked just like him. I wanted to go to Katerina Ivanovna...."""
"glance, though he knew nothing special about her. He got two roubles from her and went into a miserable little tavern on his way home. He asked for tea, sat down and sank into deep thought. A strange idea was pecking at his brain like"
"h¥ed os.0 PU tell her. iz ss at once"""
"Having laid Marmeladov down, Raskolnikov flew to"
"He forced him to take the glass. Raskolnikov raised it mechanically to his lips, but set it on the table again with disgust."
"he has any farthings, so that I could get some boots and make myself tidy enough to give lessons...hm..."
He sank into thought.
He was going home and was in a hurry to look at the invalid first. Razumihin informed him that Raskolnikov was sleeping like a dormouse. Zossimov gave orders that they shouldn't wake him and promised to see him again about eleven.
He went out.
"HEN he remembered the scene afterwards, this is how Raskolnikov saw it."
HEN next morning at eleven o'clock punctually Rase- kolnikov went into the department of the investiga-
"her mother will find out.... She will give her a beating, a horrible, shameful beating and then maybe, turn her out of doors.... And even if she does not, the Darya Frantsovnas will get wind of it, and the girl will soon be slipping out on the sly here and there. Then there will be the hospital directly (that's always the luck of those girls with respectable mothers, who go wrong on the sly) and then ...again the hospital... drink... the taverns ... and more hospital, in two or three years--a wreck, and her life over at eighteen or nineteen. ... Have not I seen cases like that? And how have they been brought to it? Why, they've all come to it like that. Ugh! But what does it matter? That's as it should be, they tell us. A certain percentage, they tell us, must every year go... that way ... to the devil, I suppose, so that the rest may remain chaste, and not be interfered with. A percentage! What splendid words they have; they are so scientific, so consolatory.... Once you've said ‘percentage,' there's nothing more to worry about. If we had any other word ... maybe we might feel more uneasy.... But what if Dounia were one of the percentage! Of another one if not that one?"
his growing excitement. But Dounia did not notice this -
His nerves were more and more strained. His head began to go round.
i
I earn? That's not what I want now. It's really absurd
"I was simply developing her, entirely disinterestedly, trying."
"In any case he must see Svidrigailov as soon as possible, he decided finally. Thank God, the details of the inter- view were of little consequence, if only he could get at the root of the matter; but if Svidrigailov were capable... if he were intriguing against Dounia,-then . ."
"In spite of those strange words he felt very wretched. He sat down on the deserted seat. His thoughts strayed aimlessly. ... He found it hard to fix his mind on any- thing at that moment. He longed to forget himself altogether, to forget everything, and then to wake up and begin life anew. ..."
"ings."""
"instant he felt almost sorry for her, how he had felt a pang at his heart..."
ipa sceatuetent.seetcett : = paises meer : Fettentct Stay : : ee a birranictat easels eT. = = ; sete chr anbp tars) i * net pied Sie
"Ke > Sa « a re dl gf ‘ a o = Pr en x . Hie) =---_ai = HE Sis \. i} ih ay 5 Ka Ha * A : > met | { / = > =~ 1) ; * a f = 7 * 7 i y = G _ --- ° iy Oe ee , -"
"know about all that idiocy, I will tell you one day, but now .) 9/77"
"Kozel's house was thirty yards away. Raskolnikov walked behind, carefully holding Marmeladov's head and showing the way."
Lebeziatnikov at once made room for him and deli- cately withdrew. Svidrigailov drew Raskolnikov further away.
"LEP BE GPM T OA ie ONE A, NA OE"
"lessons, suppose he shares his last farthing with me, if"
"Malborough s'en va-t-en guerre Ne sait quand reviendra. . ."""
managed to get along somehow. Six weeks ago he had re-
"momentary stupefaction. A ""I... am the murderer,"" repeated Nikolay, after a brief pause."
No answer.
occurred to him. His uneasiness kept on increasing. They had just reached the entrance to Bakaleyev's.
Oe: dididwalane.?
om
"On the evening of the same day, when the barracks were locked, Raskolnikov lay on his plank bed and thought of her. He had even fancied that day that all the convicts who had been his enemies looked at him differently; he had even en- tered into talk with them and they answered him in a friendly way. He remembered that now, and thought it was bound to be so. Wasn't everything now bound to be changed?"
"on the skull and split at one blow all the top of her head. She fell heavily at once. Raskolnikov completely lost his head, snatched up her bundle, dropped it again and ran into the entry."
"On the way, one question particularly worried him: had Svidrigailov been to Porfiry's? ."
Or suddenly waking up again:
"ORT LAAT ee POR ee eM Dee I Be a Ve ""4 Bd » Ace sis CAE S| ae Ae: Bhd Beat eg ee EE Pi, ie a A eR tg 4 ; a, P : fj :"
"ou?"""
"papers. ""Here!"" and he flung Raskolnikov a document and pointed out the place. ""Read that!"""
"pawnbroker, in case he might want to pawn anything. For"
"Perhaps he had daughters growing up like that, ""looking like ladies and refined"" with pretensions to gentility and smartness..."
"PG 3326 .P7 1917 SMC Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, poe and punishment"
"Pokorev, who had left for Harkov, had chanced in conversa-"
"Porfiry had shown almost all his cards-of course, he had risked something in showing them-and if he had really had anything up his sleeve (Raskolnikov reflected), he would have shown that, too. What was that ""surprise'? Was it a joke? Had it meant anything? Could it have concealed anything like a fact, a piece of positive evidence? His yes- terday's visitor? What had become of him? Where was he to-day? If Porfiry really had any evidence, it must be con- nected with him. ...,"
Pyotr Petrovitch gave a positive start-all noticed it
Pyotr Petrovitch took a stronger line.
question of personal privacy! It's always a stumbling-block
Raskolnikov could hardly have said himself what he wanted and of what he wished to make certain.
Raskolnikov did not answer. Razumihin thought a minute.
Raskolnikov drew back and iooked at her with a mournful smile. :
Raskolnikov felt as though something had fallen on him and was stifling him.
"Raskolnikov gave back the pen; but instead of getting up and going away, he put his elbows on the table and pressed his head in his hands. He felt as if a nail were being driven into his skull. A strange idea suddenly occurred to him, to get up at once, to go up to Nikodim Fomitch, and tell him everything that had happened yesterday, and then to go with him to his lodgings and to show him the things in the hole in the corner. The impulse was so strong that he got up from his seat to carry it out. ""Hadn't I better think a minute?"" flashed through his mind. ""No, better cast off the burden without thinking."" But all at once he stood still, rooted to the spot. Nikodim Fomitch was talk- ing eagerly with Ilya Petrovitch, and the words reached him :"
Raskolnikov gave her what came first-fifteen copecks.
Raskolnikov got up and took his cap. Porfiry Petrovitch also rose.
"Raskolnikov got up from the sofa. As he had mounted the stairs to Razumihin's, he had not realised that he would be"
"Raskolnikov had an intense desire again ""to put his tongue out."" Shivers kept running down his spine."
Raskolnikov had hardly opened his eyes and he in- stantly closed them again. He lay on his back without stirring.
Raskolnikov had not done so. A chill went down his back.
Raskolnikov had not known.
Raskolnikov laughed.
Raskolnikov listened greedily. Razumihin was drunk enough to talk too freely.
"Raskolnikov looked at all this with profound astonish- ment and a dull, unreasoning terror. He made up his mind to keep quiet and see what would happen. ""I believe I am not wandering. I believe it's reality,"" he thought."
"Raskolnikov looked intently at him over his shoulder and said in the same slow, lazy tone:"
"Raskolnikov made no reply, but stood beside them lost in thought. ‘"
Raskolnikov made no reply.
"Raskolnikov meanwhile induced some one to run for a doctor There was a doctor, it appeared, next door but one."
Raskolnikov noticed this disproportionate terror.
"Raskolnikov opened his eyes, started and recognized Nas-"
"Raskolnikov picked up his hat and walked towards the door, but he did not reach it. ..,."
Raskolnikov positively started.
"Raskolnikov put down his cap and continued listening in silence with a serious frowning face to the vague and empty chatter of Porfiry Petrovitch. ""Does he really want to dis- tract my attention with his silly babble?"""
Raskolnikov raised his head.
Raskolnikov repeated his statement.
Raskolnikov seemed offended.
"Raskolnikov shuddered. The Explosive Lieutenant stood before him. He had just come in from the third room, ""Tt is the hand of fate,"" thought Raskolnikov. ""Why is he here ?"" :"
"Raskolnikov smiled again. He saw the point at once, and knew where they wanted to drive him. He decided to take up the challenge."
Raskolnikov smiled.
Raskolnikov started so that Porfiry Petrovitch could not fail to perceive it.
Raskolnikov started.
Raskolnikov stopped once more.
Raskolnikov thought a minute.
"Raskolnikov unfastened the hook, opened the door-there was no sound. Abruptly, without any thought at all, he went out, closing the door as thoroughly as he could, and went downstairs."
"Raskolnikov walked to the door and would have opened it, but it was locked."
Raskolnikov was on his way to his mother's and
"Raskolnikov was violently agitated. Of course, it was all ordinary youthful talk aud thought, such as he had often heard before in different forms and on different themes. But why had he happened to hear such a discussion and such ideas at the very moment when his own brain was just conceiving ... the very same ideas? And why, just at the moment when he had brought away the embryo of his idea from the old woman, had he dropped at once upon a con- versation about her? This coincidence always seemed strange © to him. This trivial talk in a tavern had an immense influ- ence on him in his later action; as though there had really been in it something preordained, some guiding hint. ..."
Raskolnikov was waiting for him at the end of the passage.
Raskolnikov went into the room and sank exhausted on a chair.
Raskolnikov went up to Katerina Ivanovna.
"Raskolnikov. ""I invited you to see me quite in a friendly way."""
Raskolnikov's lips trembled.
Razumihin put the note on the table. Raskolnikov looked at him and turned to the wall without uttering a word. Even Razumihin felt a twinge.
"said Raskolnikov,"
"sd OU know perhaps-yes, I told you myself,"" began Svidrigailov, ""that I was in the debtors' prison"
Sek fe : echt s : : ~ steer!
She hesitated.
"She stopped and looked up quickly at him, but controlling herself went on reading. Raskolnikov sat without moving, his elbows on the table and his eyes turned away. She read to the thirty-second verse."
"Sonia sat down, almost shaking with terror, and looked timidly at the two ladies. It was evidently almost incon- ceivable to herself that she could sit down beside them. At the thought of it, she was so frightened that she hur- riedly got up again, and in utter confusion addressed Ras- kolnikov. d"
Sonia started with terror. :
Sonia strained every nerve to listen.
SS
Svidrigailov looked at him attentively and Raskolnikov fancied he caught a flash of spiteful mockery in that look. But Svidrigailov restrained himself and answered very civilly. :
Svidrigailov pulled the trigger.
"tating, then he stepped softly into the room and went cau- tiously to the sofa. Raskolnikov heard Nastasya's whisper:"
That was what Dounia did. She stole by her brother and went up to Svidrigailov.
"The crowd broke up, the police still remained round the woman, some one mentioned the police station. . . . Raskol- nikov looked on with a strange sensation of indifference and apathy. He felt disgusted. ""No, that's loathsome . . . water"
The old newspapers and the tea were brought. Raskolnikov sat down and began to look through them. 23
Then Raskolnikov repeated (rather dryly) his conversation
They all started. They had expected something quite different.
"They went out into the street gloomy and sullen, and for some steps they did not say a word. Raskolnikov drew a deep breath."
"thinking of just that, that ‘Dounia can put up with a great deal.' If she could put up with Mr. Svidrigailov and all the rest of it, she certainly can put up with a great deal. And now mother and she have taken it into their heads that she can put up with Mr. Luzhin, who propounds the theory of the superiority of wives raised from destitution and owing everything to their husband's bounty-who propounds it, too, almost at the first interview. Granted that he ‘let it slip,' though he is a sensible man, (yet maybe it was not a slip at all, but he meant to make himself clear as soon as possible) but Dounia, Dounia? She understands the man, of course, but she will have to live with the man, Why! she'd live on black bread and water, she would not sell her soul, she would not barter her moral freedom for comfort; she would not barter it for all Schleswig-Holstein, much less Mr. Luzhin's money. No, Dounia was not that sort when I knew her and... she is still the same, of course! Yes, there's no denying, the Svidrigailovs are a bitter pill! It's bitter thing to spend one's life a gover- ness in the provinces for two hundred roubles, but I know she would rather be a nigger on a plantation or a Lett with a German master, than degrade her soul, and her moral dignity, by binding herself for ever to a man whom she does not respect and with whom she has nothing in com- mon-for her own advantage. And if Mr. Luzhin had been of unalloyed gold, or one huge diamond, she would never have consented to become his legal concubine. Why is she consenting then? What's the point of it? What's the answer? It's clear enough: for herself, for her com- fort, to save her life she would not sell herself, but for some one else she is doing it! For one she loves, for one she adores, she will sell herself! That's what it all amounts to; for her brother, for her mother, she will sell herself! She will sell everything! In such cases, we ‘overcome our moral feeling if necessary,' freedom, peace, conscience even, all, all are brought into the market. Let my life go, if only my dear ones may be happy! More than that, we become casuists, we learn to be Jesuitical and for a time maybe we can soothe ourselves, we can persuade ourselves that it is one's duty for a good object. That's just like us, it's as"
"tN""?"
"trilled the thin voice of the singer. Raskolnikov felt a great desire to make out what he was singing, as though every-, thing depended on that."
two sharp and suspicious eyes stared at him out of the darkness. Then Raskolnikov lost his head and nearly made a great mistake.
"very much struck by your face this moraine. 4: _ ""Where did you see me this morning?"" Raskolnikov asked uneasily."
"Ves. g4V come,"""
Well and what then? What shall I do with the few coppers
wiee:?? 7
